[Music]
This is business breakdowns.
Business breakdowns is a series of
conversations with investors and
operators diving deep into a single
business. For each business, we explore
its history, its business model, its
competitive advantages, and what makes
it tick.
We believe every business has lessons
and secrets that investors and operators
can learn from and we are here to bring
them to you. To find more episodes of
breakdowns, check out join colossus.com.
All opinions expressed by hosts and
podcast guests are solely their own
opinions. Hosts, podcast guests, their
employers or affiliates may maintain
positions in the securities discussed in
the podcast. This podcast is
forformational purposes only and should
not be relied upon as a basis for
investment decisions.
This is Matt Russell and today's
breakdown caters to both public and
private investors alike. My guest is
Aaron Cohen, head of the financial
services and technology group at GTCR,
and our topic is insurance brokers. Now,
I was initially intrigued by Aaron and
GTCR after seeing their announced $13
billion sale of Assured Partners to
Arthur J. Gallagher, an incredible
success story in the insurance brokerage
space that we covered in a previous
breakdown. But what I failed to
appreciate, and you will hear Aaron
correct me in the episode, is that not
only did GTCR own Assured through two
separate periods, they actually built
the business with CEO Jim Henderson from
the ground up. So, we get into GTCR's
approach to scaling businesses. We use
the lens of insurance brokerage, but we
get into the nuances of their leadership
strategy and why this space is so
attractive to the PE market. The last
thing I need to highlight, if you listen
to these episodes, you know my
frustration with not acknowledging risks
to a business thesis, but the way that
Aaron addressed this was a great example
of conviction to me, not intellectual
dishonesty, and that really stood out.
So, I needed to mention that. Please
enjoy this breakdown on the insurance
brokerage space.
All right, Aaron, I'm excited to have
you here and I think we'll spend the
majority of our conversation on
insurance brokerage. It's a fascinating
subsector that's proven valuable to the
public market investors, private market
investors like yourself. But I thought a
good place to start would be table
setting with your industry coverage.
what encompasses what you're looking at
because I know it goes broader than just
insurance brokerage and maybe you can
just start there and we can take the
conversation down a few notches as we go
on.
>> Of course, Matt. So, just to level set
who I am and what we do, I'm Aaron Con.
I'm a managing director at GTCR. GTCR is
a Chicago based private equity firm.
What we do is we invest behind a
strategy that we've created called the
leader strategy backing worldclass CEOs
to build and transform companies in
industries we know very well. So private
equity has a lot of things in common but
the one thing that differentiates us is
the intersection of our leader strategy
as well as domain expertise. And maybe
that'll help get into a little bit about
what I do. I lead our financial services
and financial technology investing
industry group and that actually is a
good example. So for instance that's a
sector financial services and technology
that's a sector. It's so large and
within that sector we probably invest in
nine or 10 different industries within
the financial services industry with
insurance being one of them. Even though
I oversee that industry, I specifically
spend all of my time investing in two
primary industries. And of course,
insurance being one of them. And in
insurance, that's everything. It's
insurance brokerage. It's the carrier
side of the business. It's insurance
premium finance. It's data and
analytics, software, claims management.
We love the insurance ecosystem that we
look forward to digging into and
discussing. But GTCR as a whole invests
across four different industries. We've
been investing in that space behind that
same strategy for over 45 years. And on
the leader strategy, no one would argue
the importance of management teams. At
the same time, it's thrown around a lot
and carelessly sometimes. So, can you
just spell out a bit more about what
that means for GTCR? What great looks
like? anything that you can get into in
terms of what it means to separate great
leaders?
>> Absolutely. For us, we think the CEO is
the most important decision we make when
we underwrite an investment. So, what
does that mean? Everybody in our
industry chases deals, does proactive
work in industries to find
opportunities, but for us, the deal is
secondary. Everyone's looking for the
next deal. We believe there's plenty of
companies out there that with the great
leadership that we could improve,
transform, and create a market leader.
But for us, the scarce resource is a
CEO. There's very few CEOs that can do
what we want to partner with them to do.
We're spending all of our time in our
investment committee with our deal teams
talking about our pipeline of CEOs that
we're building relationships with. We're
nourishing and we're hopefully
eventually going to be able to partner
with to bring in to an investment that
we make to help us grow that business.
Then your question, what does great look
like? So even though we invest across
four broad industries, we invest in
business and consumer services,
healthcare, technology and internet
infrastructure, and my group financial
services and technology. Actually, our
CEOs have a lot of similar
characteristics. One, and most
importantly, they're proven money
makers. How do you define a money maker?
It's someone who has created equity
value in the past for their
shareholders. It can be for public
shareholders, private equity,
family-owned businesses, but it's great
leaders who've created value. Because a
lot of times you'll see a wonderful CEO
on paper and they grew a business 100%
over 5 years, but if their stock price
didn't move, that's not what we're
looking for. We need people who create
value because that's what we're paid to
do from our investors. So, that's the
most important one. Then there's other
critical components that you just have
pattern recognition when you meet a lot
of CEOs over your career. And the other
one is people. And what do I mean by
people, Matt? It's CEOs always have
great executives that will follow them
from job to job, company to company,
through thick and thin. They will work
and make things happen. And that is one
of the hallmarks of a great leader is
when we hire a CEO and he or she says,"I
have a great CFO. I know who's perfect
for operations and I have a fantastic
CFO."
>> And I'm curious because it's such a
fascinating concept and I generally
align with your views about the
importance and it being paramount for
these businesses. When you consider the
different size and scales of businesses,
do great leaders transcend across those
various milestones, size points? Can you
talk a bit more about that? Looking at
maybe a smaller business versus some of
the bigger scale businesses that you've
certainly stepped into in recent years.
>> Great CEOs, Matt, don't always
transcend. They might not transcend
across size nor industries. So at GTCR,
when we say we're going to back a great
CEO who's proven to have created value
in the past for his or her investors,
that doesn't mean we're going to back
them to be a CEO of any business. We
like to back insurance CEOs to run
insurance companies. We like to back
pharma CEOs to run pharma companies. I
would not even back an insurance
brokerage CEO to go run an insurance
data and analytics business. We want to
back CEOs in industries they've built
and created value in in the past and
then it allows them to avoid the simple
mistakes that firsttime CEOs make or it
avoids them to have to take tremendous
amount of time to learn a new industry.
So we back CEOs in industries that
they've created value in in the past.
And then your question on size, I think
CEOs are comfortable at different size
levels. I think there's certain CEOs who
can see the forest through the trees,
but also love to be in the weeds and be
a command and control CEO and really
have ownership of every single
functional area in their company. You
can't do that in a $5 billion company
the way you can in maybe a few hundred
million company. And then sometimes we
have great CEOs who are wonderful at
trusting and managing their direct
reports and they're great at setting
strategy and managing people and they
could run a five or 10 billion dollar
company. So I don't think that every CEO
can transcend across size.
>> I love the nuance. It's incredibly
helpful and I think it's just such an
interesting topic and subject. we can
transition a bit into the insurance
brokerage space itself and I'm sure
we'll mix in some of the other
categories within insurance to cushion
out the conversation. I love talking to
guests who have extended tenures in
certain industries or subsectors. Can
you share just a bit about your history
with the space and to some extent what
has changed versus what has not changed
over the years as you've looked at the
insurance brokerage space? So, I've been
investing in the space for a little over
20 years. It's an interesting question.
What has changed and what has not
changed? I'd say the core fundamentals
of the industries have not changed. What
is that? I'd say most importantly, it's
an industry that is less cyclical than
most. This is an industry where
regardless of what's going on in the
economy, you need to have insurance. You
need to have your employees covered. You
need to have your property covered. and
you need to make sure you have the
appropriate insurance, so it's less
cyclical than most industries. Second,
it's an asset light business model.
Third, the cash flow characteristics are
fantastic in this industry. You have
EBIDA and there's not much else below
that for cash conversion. When you think
about the cash flow characteristics
after IBIDA capex, it's not a capital
intensive business. We used to joke that
when your CEO broke his iPad, that was
the capital you spent. Now, of course,
with time, a lot of these companies are
investing in data warehouses and
technology to help drive more
efficiencies, but it's still relatively
capital-like. And then second, on the
cash flow side of the business, since it
is an acquisitive industry, you get
tremendous tax benefits by acquiring
these tuckin acquisitions that give you
a tax shield. So cash flow
characteristics in this industry are
fantastic. Then I'd say which we'll talk
to is the M&A. This is a highly highly
fragmented industry and for GTCR when we
think about tuckin acquisitions you have
a great management team. You have a
great platform. You invest in the
infrastructure and the technology and
then M&A just becomes an additional leg
of growth and value creation for the
story. And with M&A, when we have the
centralized
oversight and infrastructure and people
to support our tuckin acquisitions, it
gives them the opportunity to clear off
their plates where when you do a small
acquisition, that management team might
be doing payroll, investing in their
technology, and selling insurance. We
take all that off their plate so their
producers can do one thing, which is
sell new insurance. So, this industry
has evolved in a couple of ways, but
those things have stayed the same. I'd
say what's unique in this industry or
what's changed over the last 20 years is
what I mentioned is their ability to
embrace technology and data. Now, that
being said, there's still a long way to
do that. I think this industry is still
behind many others. And second, what's
changed is these brokers have become
bigger and they've been able to have
more influence over their insurance
carrier partners. So, what does that
mean? That means that you could drive
better commission rates. You could drive
better contingent commissions based on
volume levels. It's allowing the broker
to have a real seat at the table where
not too long ago in the mid80s, maybe
that's a long time ago now, maybe the
mid90s, insurance brokers were small,
but back then they didn't have the
ability to influence their financial
situation. Now they do because if you
think of an insurance broker and they're
putting billions of dollars of premiums
with a certain carrier, they are really
rellying, they being the carrier, on the
broker and their ability to bring them
business, which should drive more value
to the broker. And I'd say just
generally speaking, another reason why
insurance brokerage is so fantastic is
because we believe in financial
services, the person who owns the
customer relationship should be able to
drive more value out of the entire
ecosystem. And brokerage is a perfect
example of how that's evolved over the
last 20 years. To that point on the
carrier broker relationship, you could
in theory have carriers underwriting,
talking to customers themselves. I think
you certainly do still have that direct
selling out there, but has there been a
material change just in the percentage
of the market that's represented by
brokers over time? Has that been a share
gainer or a tailwind for the market? So,
you have to split up the industry
personal lines and commercial lines. Of
course, we all are familiar with the
very successful direct to consumer
personal lines of Geico and Progressive.
They have taken market share away from
brokers over the last 20 years. That
being said, their market share growth
has slowed recently. On the commercial
side, you don't see, we call it
consumer, but direct to the business
relationships from the carriers. And
there's a lot of reasons for that, but
most importantly, it's because the
insurance broker plays a very important
role that some people don't appreciate,
and that's an adviser. If you're a
midsized business or a family business
that has 20 trucks that does short-term
deliveries around a certain geography,
your entire family's net worth is tied
up in that business. And the one thing
that could bring that down is not having
the right coverage. Not having the right
liability coverage if one of your
drivers gets in an accident. Not having
the right coverage if one of your
drivers is hurt. Not having the right
coverage if you ruin some of the product
that's on your truck. So the CEOs and
leaderships of these small and midsize
businesses value the insurance broker's
advice. They value their advice around
deductibles, what insurance they need,
what insurance they don't need. And I
think another aspect of insurance
brokerage that's evolving is
specialization
because a lot of industries are becoming
more and more regulated and your
insurance broker really needs to
understand and follow the industry to be
able to evolve your insurance and make
sure you have the right protection and
that is something that has been driving
the consolidation in this industry
especially for the last 10 years and our
investment at assured partners. This was
definitely one of the drivers of the
success is we had centers of excellence.
So the traditional insurance broker,
think of a small to midsize town,
they're insuring everyone on Main
Street. They're insuring the barber
shop. They're insuring the plumber.
They're insuring the person who owns a
bunch of trucks to deliver on behalf of
Amazon. And they're truly generalists.
And now what has happened is they don't
have the expertise to be able to change
their advice based on small changes in a
specific industry because they're just
too busy. So if you think about
something at Assured Partners, we had
long-term care facilities. That industry
is driven by Medicare and the payers and
as you know how complex the health
insurance industry and just health in
general is in our country. You need
someone who really understands the
industry, understands if you're taking
on Medicare patients, are there certain
types of insurance that the government
mandates you to have? And therefore, the
specialization in this industry is
what's driving the acquisition flow as
well. And when you look at that, you see
a tremendous opportunity because what
happens is retention goes up with your
customers. And retention has always been
fantastic in this industry, but the
generalists have high 80s, low 90%
retention. The specialists, they're in
the mid to high 90s because they
understand your business. And when you
think about that specialization and how
it would translate to the bigger
businesses, maybe the acquirers of
businesses, in your mind, is the ideal
insurance brokerage one with several
segments, each with their specialists in
those categories, or is it pure play
where it's a business and while it might
have scale, it's specialized in one
specific line or insurance type? You
know, Matt, what's funny is I joke
internally at GTCR. I love insurance
brokerage because of one word,
diversification. And I mean that across
every aspect of this business. Insurance
brokerage, you need to be diversified
across carriers. You need to be
diversified across customers. You need
to be diversified across producers. And
you need to be diversified across end
markets. So you can have multiple
specialization focus within one broker.
And I think that builds a better, more
sustainable business.
>> When you are stepping into an insurance
brokerage business and you're thinking
about laying out the plan of attack, can
you talk a little bit about if there is
a playbook or if there is a strategy
ranking what you're typically looking to
do alongside that leader that you're
either putting in place or that is
already there. So I'm going to go back
to the last question which is use the
word diversification. We don't want to
invest in an insurance broker that is
highly dependent on one carrier or one
broker. You'll see that a lot,
especially in the small acquisitions
we've done in the past where two or
three brokers basically are the entire
business. They own all the customer
relationships. Then you're just relying
on those people and the question really
becomes who owns the business? Is it you
or the broker who owns the customer
relationship? So, we want some level of
diversification. Number two, I'd say
we're looking for some basic centralized
infrastructure.
They have the right agency management
system. They have the appropriate
technology to support the brokers. We'll
invest in that. But if you're looking at
a specific broker, you want them to have
that. And then most importantly, it's
all about the people. This is a business
where we don't have machines making
widgets. We have people, human beings
with emotion and personal lives who have
to go out and satisfy our existing
customers and win new customers every
single day. And you need to have great
leaders who understand that and know how
to work and partner with the brokers and
the entire organization to be able to
drive success. Because if a broker's
unhappy with his job or something's
going on in his life, we all had good
days and bad days. You don't sell.
Machines don't have emotion. It's
wonderful. they just keep on plowing
along. But here, it's all about having
CEOs and regional leaders who have great
EQ and could partner with their sales
folks and people in the market to be
able to drive business. As you think
about the competition, I think what you
mentioned in terms of operating the
business, the importance of the people
involved all the way down from the top
to the producers that stands out when
they're actually out there looking to
make the sales. What does competition
actually look like? And how fierce is
that when you're thinking about whether
it's maintaining, the retention rates
are quite impressive, but not just
maintaining, actually growing the
business. What comes into play with the
business model in terms of just winning
more business in the future?
>> There is a tremendous amount of
competition in this industry. As you
could go through the list of the top 20
insurance brokers, they're probably all
billiondoll plus companies. So, there's
a tremendous amount of competition. That
being said, as you mentioned, retention
is very, very strong in this industry.
And the irony is this is an industry,
and I've never seen any other industry
like this. We don't set our price. So,
our customers are not shopping the
insurance broker's price. Sometimes
they're shopping the carrier's price,
which if you're doing your job as an
insurance broker, you're giving multiple
options to your customer and finding
them the best price. So, it's an
industry where you don't set your price
and your customers don't shop your
price. So the irony is in the industry
where there's what we call hard and soft
markets. Hard markets are rising rates,
rising premiums for a bunch of reasons
we could talk about if you want or soft
market when rates are coming down. in a
rising rate environment, in a hired
market is a lot of times when you see
some attrition because even though
you're getting the best rate for your
customer, if their rate went up 15%,
even though you've gotten them five
quotes from the five largest and most
respected insurance carriers out there,
they just feel like they need to shop it
and that's when you see some attrition
even though it's outside the control of
the broker. And a lot of times they're
not going to get a better price from
someone else, but sometimes you just
feel like they want to see that change.
So it's something very unique in this
industry that you don't see in many
others. The other thing I'd say is where
we've seen retention grow and organic
growth accelerate is once we buy some of
these acquisitions. A lot of times
people say you buy the founder out,
they're done. You see growth slow. We've
actually seen the inverse because what
we've seen is we'll buy out a founder. A
lot of times that founder will roll a
significant amount of their proceeds
into our business. Assured partners is
the most recent one. And then they're
freed up to be able to go out and grow
their business and not have the
handcuffs of dealing with all the
corporate stuff. But then most
importantly, they get access to our
center of excellence. So you buy a
broker in Green Bay who's focused on
farming and commercial transportation
and all of a sudden they're going to get
a nationalwide network of experts to be
able to help educate their clients and
get them even better coverage. So it's a
really interesting industry in that way.
>> Absolutely. And to ask a similar
question but slightly differently when
you're thinking about the investment
opportunity is market share growth or
the capturing of additional market share
through organic expansion and capturing
of that share core to the thesis or
could you underwrite some of these just
based on maintaining market share within
a growing pie going forward? If you
could separate those two, I'm just
trying to capture the understanding of
how important that is to capture more
and more of the industry organically
versus doing it through M&A or just
capturing the tailwind in the market.
Most importantly, if you want to grow
your pie and increase your market share,
that will drive premium valuations on
the exit. This industry, as we've
discussed and as you read research on
the large public companies, everyone
focuses on two growth stats. total
growth which includes M&A and organic
growth and organic growth is what drives
those wonderful valuations. So for us
when you find the great CEO who can
absolutely drive organic growth but
understand and execute M&A that's a
win-win. That being said, to your
question, you have seen insurance
brokers be very successful by growing
with inflation, for lack of a better
term, and driving a lot of value
creation through M&A. The best success
stories do them both.
>> Yep. Constellation Software, completely
different industry, but not much focus
on organic growth historically there,
and they've done quite all right, just
riding the tailwinds.
>> Well, it's interesting, Matt, on that
topic. There are players in this
industry that don't push organic growth
and the flip side is they have higher
margins because they're not investing in
producers. They're not investing in go
to market. So this industry while it's a
wonderful wonderful industry,
competitors look very similar until you
really dig deep and you can look at a
competitor and look at their ebida
margins and pretty much guess what their
organic growth is.
>> Yeah. makes those ROIC's look better
with those margins at least in the short
term.
>> On the scale point, I think it comes
with a lot of things. I think earlier on
you mentioned it should be able to get
you better whether it's pricing or there
should be some economies of scale with
the carriers. Does that tend to show up
in terms of the offering that they can
provide to customers and how meaningful
is that in terms of driving a difference
that shows up in results? It all depends
on size. And I've looked at insurance
brokers with a few hundred thousand
dollars of EBIDA, not even revenue. And
I've looked at insurance brokers with
hundreds of millions of dollars of
EBITDA. I would say what's important on
the scale side is those small brokers,
they don't have access to all the
markets. markets, another term for the
carriers that a large broker would have
because if they don't have a lot of
volume, a lot of the carriers don't even
want to talk to them. They don't want to
spend time quoting their business. So, I
think as you grow, it brings you more
optionality and access to more markets
and hopefully better terms and better
pricing for your customer. So, I think
that's where size does matter. And I
don't think there's a perfect threshold
of what size do you have to be to be
able to have access to the markets. It
all depends on your end market that
you're writing, your customer size, etc.
So that's how I think about size
relative to access. But I think once
you're an established business, you have
a $100 million plus of revenue, you will
be able to access all the markets that
you'll need to be able to get the best
product for your customer. Early on you
mentioned the adoption or incorporation
of technology into the system. How is
that showing up? Where does it show up
and what difference does the technology
make for the business?
>> Sure. I like to make the joke, but I
don't think I'm joking. People say
financial services is about 5 or 10
years behind the rest of the world in
terms of adopting technology. I think
that's right. But I think insurance and
insurance brokerage is probably 10 to 15
years behind. Now, we're coming up
pretty quickly, but there are a bunch of
different areas where technology helps.
First, most importantly, is having one
agency management system across the
organization. An agency management
system, think of that as the ERP system
where the brokers live in. They put
potential clients in there. That's where
they run all their processing,
underwriting, acceptance, claims
management, etc. In order to have one
agency management system across your
organization allows you to see your
organization fully understand what type
of policies you're writing, what type of
risks you're putting with what carriers
and you can have the data at your hands
to be able to drive better negotiations
with the carriers. But then it also
helps the brokers. There are a
tremendous amount of filings because
this industry is regulated state by
state. So, the brokers need to have the
technology to be able to quickly fill
out forms and be able to submit them to
the appropriate entities or the carriers
to be able to do their jobs efficiently
and sell more business. There's a lot of
brokers out there, they're still using
pen and paper. And then if you overlay
the technology with AI, it should be
able to allow brokers to have much much
more free time to be able to go out and
sell new business, which is the goal.
So, I think this industry is on a
journey. I like sports. If we're
baseball, we're probably only in the
third inning in terms of the ability to
really use technology and data to be
more efficient, leaner, and drive better
growth.
>> And tying it back into the M&A, it's
always great in concept, but sometimes
where M&A can break down is the
integration, and it can be technology
integration. Have you found that this
sector the integration follows a
standard playbook? Do you see that cause
challenges for businesses whether it's
ones that you've been around or have
seen elsewhere? It seems M&A is just
part of the model. But when you factor
in the incorporation of what you
mentioned with records and filings and
everything that goes into it, I would
imagine that it's not easy.
>> It is not easy. It's probably not the
hardest industry to integrate, but it
takes time. You need a team and you need
to do it right. Because what we've seen
in this industry in the past is when you
slack on integration or you cut corners
and it looks like a small corner or you
don't do one thing here and another
thing there, before you know it, you're
a large business and it's impossible to
catch up. So for us, we just bought a
business over in the UK called JMG
Group. They focus on small insurance
brokers in the UK and they have a
playbook to integrate the business.
Everyone's on the same system using the
same data within 90 days. And that
allows them to be able to run the
business much more efficiently, not have
surprises and be able to take control of
those acquisitions that you bought. If
you leave people on dispirit systems,
you're not running the business. They
are. you're not getting the right KPIs
to manage the business. You're not
seeing what's coming around the corner.
And what happens then is it's too hard
to integrate and then you're just a
hundred different corks floating down
the river at your own speed and
eventually it catches up to you.
>> Yeah. To your point, I think FedEx might
still be integrating the TNT acquisition
from 10 years ago. It's a little
different when there's hard assets and
infrastructure and logistics networks
involved where technology and
incorporating some of those systems. Not
only could it be a bit lower of a
hurdle, but it proves to add a lot of
value as well. The flip side on that,
Matt, is people are used to doing things
a certain way. And we talked about the
importance of people and they go home
every night. And a lot of times brokers
are set in their ways and they're older
and later in their career and they don't
want to learn a new system. So you have
to make sure that you're buying a
business where people are going to
embrace that change. Otherwise, you
could break it by forcing the
integration on people who don't want to
do it, aren't willing to do it, or are
just happy using pencil and paper.
>> Yeah. Producers historically have found
ways to write their own rules when it
comes to managing systems, but keeping a
clear mantra intact and getting people
to follow protocols, I can imagine, is
just insanely interesting here. The
general market when you think about
revenue growth for any of these
businesses, you mentioned that
diversification is an incredible
positive. What does the trend line look
like when you think about an insurance
business and topline growth? If I were
to use GDP growth as the standard and
either being above or below that as
being a line of demarcation, do you have
a mental framework of what you expect
organically insurance businesses to
grow?
>> Yes, I believe it's inflation plus.
Don't ask me plus what? But for us, what
we've seen, especially, we're always
talking PNC right now, property and
casualty insurance, is the other thing
that's driving it, besides inflation,
which of course inflation is just the
underlying results of your assets being
worth more, your business and services
growing. The other thing is this
industry is enduring right now is social
inflation. So social inflation is a very
nice word for large jury verdicts. If
you are going to insure a bunch of
trucks, and I keep on using that example
because we've done a lot of trucking in
the past, and you get an offender bender
and someone hurts their neck, and all of
a sudden a jury awards that person $20
million. They didn't have to take off
more than two weeks of work and these
jury verdicts are getting enormous. And
I think juries are being more
sympathetic to consumers relative to the
big bad companies um saying ingest. And
so you have social inflation that's
really impacting it. The other thing
that's growing premiums, which isn't
great, is new risks. So there's cyber
risk. So how do you price that? That's a
whole new industry that's being brought
into the insurance sector. Then if
you're underwriting schools, crime in
schools, if you're underwriting an
office building, we see these horrible,
horrible tragedies that went on in
Manhattan yesterday that are
unspeakable. But then from a business
perspective and you're ensuring those
people and that risk, price is going to
go up because these things are
happening. So those are the things
unfortunately that are driving this
industry to grow at a bit faster than
inflation.
>> Yes. and acknowledging the dynamics that
are causing it and just putting those to
the side to focus on the impact that
that would have for an insurance
brokerage business. Is it right to just
think if premiums are growing, the
brokers are capturing a percentage of
those premiums, therefore that is
topline growth? Is that the most
simplistic way to think about it?
>> That is fair. And that's for the small
and midsize world. So I'd separate that
from if you think about the Fortune 500,
they have really smart actuaries and
insurance experts who are determining
what type of insurance they need.
They're going to the large broker houses
and they're paying a fee and the broker
house is getting a fee. The traditional
mid-marketme
etc PNC world where private equity has
been incredibly successful for the last
20 years that is commission. Yes. So, as
premiums go up, the revenue of that
insurance broker goes up. So, it's a
wonderful business because we don't have
to ask our clients for raises. We don't
have to change our price. We just get a
percentage paid by the carrier back to
us of their premium.
>> Out of curiosity, is there a threshold
where you move from the percentage to
the fee? Is there a number that's
involved there that you have mentally?
There's not a number, but it's big. If
you think about any type of growing
business and a management team and a
board of directors who are trying to set
strategy and allocate capital, you have
to be pretty big to say the next $5
million, I want to build an insurance
department at this organization. So,
it's truly the largest of the largest
corporations.
>> And you mentioned some of the new risks
coming into the system. One of the
things that I often think about is cyber
security and whether it's just the trend
line of what's happened in the cloud and
now we have AI, but it's something that
in theory should be more and more in
focus going forward. Does that category
fall under this bucket as well? Does it
tuck into a large insurance broker's
operations or would that sit outside?
>> No, this absolutely tucks into all the
insurance brokers that we've been
talking about today. If you have a
business, you need cyber insurance.
Absolutely. And the irony is this is the
first type of risk that I believe is
very different than any other risk in
insurance, which is why it's really hard
for carriers to underwrite it. And I
love talking about this and I get up on
a little bit of a soap box. Most other
risks that you think about, property
damage, slip and fall, etc.,
Once the carrier or the insurance broker
hears about the risk and the event, it's
done. It's behind you. The fire
happened, your manufacturing facility
burnt down, it's done. Cyber is real
time. You call your insurance broker,
you call your carrier, and you say,
"Someone is in our systems. We've had a
breach." So carriers who obviously have
to minimize their loss exposure, they
have to be proactive and be prepared to
move very quickly to help the insured
exit or end this breach situation. So,
it's a very very different risk than any
other risk this industry has ever seen,
which is why people are struggling with
underwriting it, pricing it
appropriately, and you're seeing some
carriers have pretty adverse loss ratios
because it's a very, very different
outcome than any other risk in this
industry. I think again it proves your
point on why brokerages are the
interesting niche within here where you
don't have the carrier underwriting risk
that sits on your balance sheet but you
still get to capture the upside of the
growing market. So probably came across
in all of your previous answers but just
to spell that out again I think that one
certainly proves the point.
>> Yeah I mean the best part about this
industry insurance brokerage is
insurance brokers do not take risk. Now,
of course, people could argue over the
long term, they may if they keep on
placing bad risk with the carrier, the
carrier may cut them off, but that would
be adverse selection, which you don't
see. If you have general loss ratios
consistent with the industry and other
brokers that are placing premium with
that carrier, you are not taking any
risk. And I mentioned it earlier. I do
believe in insurance and broader
financial services that if you own that
customer relationship, you should
increase your percentage of the
ecosystem profits that you derive. And
that's because you're helping the
insured decide what carrier to go with.
And what's interesting about that is if
you think about it, most people, and
when I say people, I'm talking
businesses here, but people as well,
they don't really care who their
insurance carrier is. As long as they're
A-rated and they're known to pay claims,
they're happy to go with any of the top
wonderful carriers out there. So, their
broker has a tremendous, tremendous
impact on their decision. And when you
think about an insurance carrier,
they're large companies. They're capital
intensive and that's really what drives
their value proposition. They bring
capital and capital is a wonderful thing
but it is a bit of a commodity.
Sometimes it's more scarce than others
and commodities don't get the same value
proposition as driving customers to
decisions on the difference between
brokers when you get down to the
profitability metrics and I think IBIDA
margin to your point IBIDA translating
to free cash flow I would imagine that
is the metric that tends to get a lot of
focus. What does that range typically
look like for these businesses in terms
of somewhat mature insurance brokerages?
How much variance is there from one
operator to the next?
>> I think the financials of these brokers
of similar size are very similar. Their
EBIDA margins are all within a couple
hundred basis points of each other. And
that difference usually is organic
growth. You can look at that over the
course of the last 20 years. And a
broker with 3% higher margin probably
has 1% less organic growth, but they are
very similar within bounds. And of
course, as they get larger, they do have
the ability to increase their margins
because there are scale advantages and
operating efficiencies.
>> Is there a range out of curiosity that
you could put numbers around?
>> Just EBIDA margins, Matt?
>> Yeah,
>> a solid insurance broker could be in the
range of 28 to 35%.
certainly healthy when you factor in
what that means for free cash flow. In
terms of the investments or anything
below the line that would be required
putting aside leverage and the capital
structure, what would go into other
investments that need to be made whether
it's now or in the future that you think
about as an investor?
>> There are not large capital requirements
in this business. This is a very very
clean cash flow. Besides capital
structure, it's really just capex which
is a few percent of revenue growing a
little bit faster than topline probably
because people are investing in
technology and data and efficiencies but
it's a really really clean business and
that's why everyone's done very well in
this industry and it's traded so well
for so long.
>> How do you view it to your point? I
think we've laid out why the private
equity market would love this particular
subsector and I would imagine that's
brought in more competition for you in
your seat. What does that look like and
how do you think about the go forward in
terms of the opportunity set here to
find these businesses and to continue
the playbook?
>> So, we have seen valuations grow pretty
dramatically over the last 25 years. I
think it's a result of a few different
things. One is I think before the
financial crisis, insurance brokerage
was not viewed that favorably from
public market or private equity
investors. They kind of viewed it as an
industry where business was done on the
golf course and there wasn't much value
proposition there and people were just
wrong. And I think the world saw that
during the financial crisis when every
other industry in the financial services
world got decimated being dramatic to
prove a point and insurance brokers grew
they grew and I think it put a spotlight
on the industry so that brought in more
competition more capital then what we've
talked about earlier in this call is I
think pre-inancial crisis and pre- turn
of the century a lot of the brokers were
small so they could not drive premium
valuations because they couldn't drive
their price even though they don't set
price for the customer. They do set
their commission rates with the carriers
and if the carriers didn't have large
brokers that they were relying on to
bring books and books of business to,
they didn't have to pay them much. So
one the spotlight from how this industry
performs and number two as they got
bigger they were able to increase their
commission rates either through variable
or fixed commissions saw that this is an
industry worth investing in the private
equity industry entered this industry
then we went on a run of 20 years of low
interest rates which obviously helps
when you're doing M&A if you could
borrow very cheaply to buy these
wonderful assets. So we've seen
valuations not quite but maybe doubled
in the last 25 years. I'd say
pre-inancial crisis this industry traded
eight and a half times and now great
brokers and the public brokers trade it
17 18 19 times. And I think it's driven
a lot by the cash flow characteristics
of this business. Everyone understands
the recurring revenue nature of this
business and the M&A opportunity.
There's very few industries that have
such a plethora of M&A opportunities.
And what's amazing is this industry is
still fragmented and there's still
thousands and thousands of brokers for
people to buy and get those synergies
and get that operating leverage. And the
funny thing now is you're seeing old
brokers who have sold run out their
non-competes and start new businesses.
So this industry still has a long way to
go to get truly consolidated like we've
seen in other industries and there's
still tremendous opportunity for value
creation for investors. This somewhat
overlaps with that question and answer.
But you have a very interesting example
with Assured Partners, a business that
you invested in, exited and then got
back involved and have since made
announcements. Can you talk a little bit
about that particularly the initial exit
and then investing back into the
business again and how that comes around
and whether that is symbolic of the way
that things can continue to operate in
the future
>> of course but I'm going to correct your
semantics Matt on one point we didn't
invest in assured we started assured
partners we formed that company
>> okay yes
>> so I'll go back to our leader strategy
which is we look to meet great CEOs post
build relationships and find assets to
buy or build with them. Jim Henderson is
the quintessential example of a leader
strategy CEO. We built a relationship
with Jim because he was on the board of
another insurance business. We were
invested in a carrier called Ironshore.
So Jim is a legend in this industry.
I've never met a CEO more well-liked
because when you're a hard-nosed CEO,
you always cross some people, not on
purpose. Jim is the ultimate gentleman
and he's been incredibly successful. He
had a reputation and preceded him. When
he joined the board of Ironshore, my
partner and I would change seats at
dinner to be able to sit next to Jim.
And we built a relationship with Jim
over time. And after a couple of years,
he was looking to do something
different. And he called us down to
Orlando where he lives. And we literally
built the Assured Partners idea truly on
the back of a napkin in his backyard. I
mean, it's straight out of a movie. So,
Jim and we formed Assured Partners. GTCR
committed several hundred million to Jim
to build this company. Obviously, Jim
was in the space for 30 years prior, so
he knew the entire industry, both people
and target acquisitions. And our goal
was to build an insurance broker with
him. and he wanted to learn from what he
did in his career and build a better
broker all about clients and clients and
brokers and that was our goal. And
someone like Jim,
everyone was dying to work for him. So
before we even owned an asset, we had
about six people on the payroll that we
were funding with equity, a president, a
head of M&A, a CFO because everyone
wanted to work for Jim. So we were just
burning cash until we found a platform.
Now we're not a venture capital firm. So
we didn't say go hire producers and
start writing your first piece of
business. We were looking for a platform
and our first platform was a company
called Nie Lukans in Cincinnati, Ohio.
And it was a small business, but it was
big enough that had some basic
infrastructure and the ability for Jim
to professionalize the business and we
went off. So that is the quintessential
GTCR story. Find a great CEO and a
management team. Find a business, bring
that team in to run the business. So, at
the time, Nie Lukans was a very small
business, but the management team we
brought in, they were used to running
billion-dollar businesses. And then on
top of that, people wanted to sell.
People wanted to work for Jim. I
wouldn't say we were getting a discount,
but we were winning ties because people
wanted to be part of what Jim was
creating. So, we built a wonderful,
wonderful business over five years.
Unfortunately, in private equity, we do
have to sell our businesses, even our
great ones. That being said, we at GTCR
like to own businesses longer than the
industry average. So, we were coming up
on our 5year anniversary and we were
more than three times ahead of our back
of our napkin plan. Our goal was to get
to $40 million of EBID DA in 5 years.
Like I said, we were well in excess of
three times that. So, we were excited.
We spent so much time finding the right
people, investing in the technology,
investing in growth that we wanted to
keep on compounding. And frankly, Jim,
who was a wonderful partner, said, "I
recruited all these people. I promised
them that in private equity, they were
coming to work for me for the equity,
the equity side of private equity, and
we owe them a payday." So, we sold the
business, and it was a wonderful success
and one of the best deals in our fund.
And of course, we stayed in contact with
Jim. Jim is a personal friend at this
point and we were staying in touch and I
remember I was walking through Disney
World. My kids were young then and Jim
called me up and said, "Let's do it
again." And I said, "Jim, do what?" And
he said his current sponsors wanted to
sell and we should work together again.
At GTCR, that's the best phone call you
can ever get, which is when a CEO wants
to work with you again. And if you think
about private equity and get into little
geeky finance, risk and reward are
correlated. Our biggest risk, especially
as you hear us talk about the leader
strategy, our biggest risk is finding a
CEO where you think you're well aligned,
putting them in a business, and you're
not well aligned and you have to change
management and all the leakage that
comes with that. That doesn't happen
often, but that is a risk. And here
we've worked together. We've seen eye to
eye. We understood the strategy we
wanted to continue to execute. So all of
a sudden we had asymmetric upside
because we had the same reward potential
with a significant risk chopped off our
other side. So we were very excited. We
partnered with Jim and the management
team to reby the business almost 6 years
ago and now we built it to over a
billion dollars of Ebida into a
wonderful diversified specialty focused
business. And it was announced last
November that we're selling the company
to AJ Gallagher, just one of the
absolute role models in the middle
market insurance brokerage space and a
family we have tremendous, tremendous
respect for. That's an incredible story
that really encapsulates all of the
higher level investment frameworks along
with the nuance of the industry. I love
hearing that and spelling out the
details on the point of the exits which
you need to think about the scale
becomes bigger and there's certainly in
private markets various chapters where I
think I know some smaller market PE
folks that look and try to build
businesses that they can sell to middle
market and once you get up to the size
and scale that you operate in it becomes
a bigger challenge or there's less
natural buyers so how do you view the
opportunity set for when you're exiting
whether it's finding strategic public
companies that could potentially be
buyers IPOing. I'm just curious how you
think through those opportunities and
evaluate them.
>> So Matt, I think you're talking about
exits for much larger platforms,
hundreds of millions, even billions of
dollars of EBDA, and I do think there
are exits for those larger businesses.
Now, I do appreciate you recognizing
we're doing bigger deals, but at GTCR,
we still love doing what we've always
done, which is small buy and builds,
consolidations in industries, and we do
have a fund that allows us to do smaller
deals as well, because we have a
flagship fund, then we have a strategic
growth opportunity where we are able to
do smaller deals as well. But anyways,
to your question, Matt, I think there's
a couple of different paths for
liquidity or exits for these larger
brokers. First, if you think about many
other industries, they all consolidate
at the top. There's very few industries
where there's seven mega players. And
this is an industry where there's
probably five to six players with
billion dollars of plus of EBDA. And
there's probably another 10 players with
$500 million plus of EBIDA. So I would
expect the big players to consolidate
and still get all those synergies of
what you'd normally see in larger
transactions of that size. Second, I do
believe there are large strategics that
still love the middle market and would
be willing to do larger transactions.
That being said, there's not that many
and there's not enough large public
strategics to buy the next 15 largest
private companies. So last, you are
talking about potential IPOs. This
industry, as we've talked about, has
performed incredibly well for public
investors, and you should expect to see
a handful of private equitybacked
insurance brokers go public over the
next couple of years. We've talked a lot
about what makes this a very special
industry. When you think about the
risks, what stands out the most to you
just as a risk that could be on the
horizon or you look for in the
operational results? What tends to stand
out the most for you?
>> I hate hate hate when people talk about
investments and don't identify risks or
ways to lose money because you could do
that in any industry. But what is
wonderful about this business is I'm
going to go back to the diversification
and we always used to laugh with Jim. If
we lost our largest customer, Jim
wouldn't call us because Jim wouldn't
know cuz your largest customer is way
less than 1% of revenue. So there's not
a risk out there like I don't look at AI
and say that could take down this
industry. Can it make it more efficient
for the carriers? Can it make it more
efficient for the brokers? Yes.
Insurance is one of the oldest
industries in the world. And on the
insurance brokerage side, I don't see
something that would fundamentally
change the industry. You could have
years of slower growth. We didn't talk
about the insurance cycle, which is hard
and soft markets based on capital
availability and carriers profitability.
So, you could have several years of a
soft market where premiums are coming
down and therefore your commissions are
coming down. that would slow your growth
and impact your cash flow generation.
Now, you would hope in that environment,
which we've seen before, tuck in
acquisitions probably get a little bit
cheaper. So you could have and there has
been years of soft markets where the
results aren't as strong as you'd like
to see, but there is not an esoteric
risk that is going to bring down this
industry or I am worried about that will
fundamentally change the structure of
the industry.
>> Just on the soft markets, is that
typically tied to macro cycles? Is there
something else that drives when you do
have a slowdown?
>> So, it's funny cuz we've done a
tremendous amount of work and sometimes
soft markets have correlated with soft
economic times, but it's not always the
case. They're not perfectly correlated.
What really drives them is insurance
carriers profitability. And the one most
important thing to identify a potential
hard or soft market is forget about
carriers revenue, their profitability,
their net income, cash flow. When
carriers have positive cash flow,
they're happy they're generating
returns. It's when they dip into
negative cash flow area that you'll see
the market harden because they got a
push rate to drive returns. So cash flow
is the number one predictor of a
potential hard or soft market and the
insurance industry's profitability. Yes,
it's underpinned by the overall economy,
but you could have two horrible storms.
You could have an earthquake in
California and a hurricane in Florida in
the worst economy in the world and all
of a sudden prices are going up and
insurance brokers are going to make more
money because they get a percent of that
premium. So there are risks that are
independent from the broader global
macro economy that would drive a hard
and soft market.
>> Very interesting. The last thing that I
wanted to touch on, you brought it up
earlier was it's a highly regulated
industry. seems like the impact for the
brokers is mostly on the filing and
whatnot. But in terms of regulation as
either a risk or a potential catalyst
and tailwind, are there anything out
there that would directly impact the
brokers from a regulatory standpoint
that you're watching closely or there's
a milestone that's upcoming that you
would be looking out for? There's
nothing on the horizon that's being
discussed whether at the state or
federal level that people are worried
about. You had the whole Spitzer
situation back in pre-inancial crisis
that really shook this industry, but
right now it's pretty well regulated. It
works very well. And I think an
advantage of being a slightly bigger
broker is you have the ability to track
the regulations and be able to grow by
state because it's regulated by the
state. So every state is different and
you have the capital to be able to
support having a regulatory team to just
follow the regimes and understand what's
going on. But there's nothing on the
horizon that's material to this industry
right now.
>> Well Aaron, this has been a pleasure.
Thank you for sharing all the knowledge,
the history, and some fun stories along
the way. I appreciate you joining us,
>> Matt. Thank you for having me. It was a
lot of fun.
>> To find more episodes of breakdowns
ranging from Costco to Visa to Madna, or
to sign up for our weekly summary, check
out join colossus.com. That's
jolsus.com.
[Music]